Analyze indices of textual cohesion of texts using semantic networks of cliques

Authors: Davi Alves Oliveira, Valter de Senna, and Hernane Borges de Barros 
Pereira

This script was developed and used for the study reported in the article 
“Indices of Textual Cohesion by Lexical Repetition Based on Semantic Networks 
of Cliques” submitted to the journal Expert Systems with Applications 
(https://www.sciencedirect.com/journal/expert-systems-with-applications) in 
2023. The abstract and keywords of the article can be found below.
The script uses data from the Open American National Corpus 
(OANC - https://anc.org/). The data consists of a sample of 60 texts that were 
modified before use. The modifications were, as stated in the article, “titles 
and information considered paratextual (e.g., declarations of competing 
interests, lists of abbreviations) were removed, and periods not used as 
sentence boundaries were either removed or replaced. For example, the 
abbreviation ‘b.c.’ became ‘bc’, common abbreviations were replaced by their 
full form (e.g., ‘fig.’ replaced with ‘figure’), and decimal separators were 
changed from ‘.’ to ‘;’ so that ‘1.0’ became ‘1;0’.”.

Abstract
Cohesion is one of the main defining characteristics of textuality. There is a 
lack of approaches to textual cohesion benefiting from both high computational 
implementability, and compatibility with established theories of text 
organization and comprehension. The main goal of this study was to define 
indices of textual cohesion based on lexical repetition and semantic networks 
of cliques that can measure cohesion while being compatible with the 
aforementioned theories. As specific goals, the study aimed to develop an 
improved taxonomy for lexical repetition and to analyze the behavior of the 
proposed indices with a sample of texts from different genres. Six indices were
proposed, and 60 texts from six different genres were analyzed. The results 
showed that the indices can capture different patterns of lexical cohesion that
can be explored, for example, in classification tasks applied to texts, in 
summarization tasks, and in the adaptation of reading material to improve the 
readability and comprehensibility of texts by less proficient readers. 
Additionally, the patterns observed within the analysis of full texts were also
observed in the analysis of the first 10 to 60 sentences of texts, depending 
on the index considered, suggesting that the first 10 to 60 sentences of a text
are enough to analyze its lexical cohesion.

Keywords: Textual cohesion, network theory, semantic networks, networks of 
cliques
